<wiki:toc max_depth="1" />


= What is this Project =
"Project 065" is India's first project to write a wiki based, collaboratively written textbook for CBSE Class XI & XII - subject code 065. Subject Code 065 is called Informatics Practice. 

= What is Wiki System =
wiki allows easy creation and editing of any number of interlinked web pages via a web browser using a simplified markup language or a WYSIWYG text editor.

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wiki

= How to Join this project =
== Step 1: ==
Join Our mailing list, [http://groups.google.com/group/cbse065 here]
== Step 2: ==
Checkout the stage of development. We have divided the whole in appx 50 modules. You can see list of modules and the percentage of work done. Choose any of the module and enhance it. The Syllabus is available [http://code.google.com/p/cbse-065/wiki/syllabus here] . For example 
 * After seeing syllabus, 
 * you want to edit/start/enhance module 30 then just open module 30 using this url http://code.google.com/p/cbse-065/wiki/module30. 
 * you want to edit/start/enhance module 25 then just open module 25 using this url http://code.google.com/p/cbse-065/wiki/module25. and so on ..

If you feel problem in editing then you can make module document using OpenOfficeOrg Or similar tool and upload the .odt version of file.

== Step 3: ==
Post your interest in contributing in Mailing list or mail narendrasisodiya@gmail.com

= How to upload text =
There are many different ways in which wikis have users edit the content. Ordinarily, the structure and formatting of wiki pages are specified with a simplified markup language, sometimes known as "wikitext".

http://code.google.com/p/support/wiki/WikiSyntax

= What is CC-By-SA & Why it is important =
You have see book which include copyright notice like "(c)1990-96 ABC publisher/XYZ All right reserved, ...". It means you cannot reprint, modify, reuse the textbook. You cannot even take photocopy of book. The team of "Project 065" believe in sharing knowledge. We are writing a textbook with a *permissive copyright license* called "CC-By-SA". Because we are releasing the content using CC-By-SA, you have full permission to

 * You are free:
    * to Share — to copy, distribute and transmit the work
    * to Remix — to adapt the work
 * Under the following conditions:
    * Attribution — You must attribute the work in the manner specified by the author or licensor (but not in any way that suggests that they endorse you or your use of the work).
    * Share Alike — If you alter, transform, or build upon this work, you may distribute the resulting work only under the same, similar or a compatible license.

 read more at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/

=How to use google to search for CC by SA content=
You can search google for open content by clicking 
[http://www.google.com/search?q=CC-By-SA&as_rights=%28cc_publicdomain|cc_attribute|cc_sharealike%29.-%28cc_noncommercial|cc_nonderived%29 here]

= How to add image on your wiki page  =
 * http://groups.google.com/group/cbse065/browse_thread/thread/6d9a79caa23dd179
= What type of Images I can add here =
 * You can only add "CC-By-SA" images.
 * One quick way to take image is from CCsearch
  * Search it here http://www.flickr.com/search/?l=commderiv&mt=all&adv=1&w=all&q=&m=text
  * Get exact image url
  * paste on your module/article
 * You can also create new image and upload it flickr and give a link here


= Who are in Project =
 * Volunteers and Organizations across India. See [list_of_volunteer]

= When this project started =
 * 6 Jan 2010

= Contact =
 * All communication must be done via Mailing list but in case or urgency you can contact Narendra Sisodiya for help desk (narendrasisodiya @gmail.com)

= Where is the mailing list =
 * http://groups.google.com/group/cbse065